.TH DLFORMAT 5 7/16/82
.CM 3
.SH "NAME"
dlformat \- The Motorola S0-S9 download format and associated programs.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The S0-S9 downloading format is a means of sending binary data over serial
i/o lines.
Several programs in the 68000 software system understand and
use the format.
A complete description of the format can be found in
Appendix B of the VersaBug manual.
The following table is extracted from
that document for convenience.
.nf
.sp
.B
Record Types
.fi
.TP
S0
Header record
.TP
S1
Data record with 16 bit address
.TP
S2
Data record with 24 bit address
.TP
S3
Data record with 32 bit address
.TP
S4
(unused but reserved)
.TP
S5
Transmitted data record count record
.TP
S6
(unused but reserved)
.TP
S7
End of file/32 bit execution address record
.TP
S8
End of file/24 bit execution address record
.TP
S9
End of file/16 bit execution address record
.i0
.DT
.PP
.sp
Three pieces of software cooperate to produce, send and receive .dl files.
.sp
Down68(1) is the component of the 68000 C compiler that produces
a .dl file from a .b file.
The name of the file is inserted into the
S0 record at the start of the file.
The S1 and S2 records carry the
data by translating each byte of binary data into two hexadecimal characters.
The S8 or S9 record at the end carries the starting execution address
of the program.
.sp
Dl(1) takes a list of filenames, looks for them and sends the files over a
serial line. The only format modification made by dl is the exclusion of
ending S8 records from all but the last file. If errors are encountered, dl
sends error messages as text in S0 records.
.sp
Finally, the
.I
download()
subroutine in the 68000 monitor eprom receives the transmitted records and
loads the binary data into memory. When an S0 record is encountered, every
byte following the 'S0' characters is printed verbatim. This allows dl(1)
to communicate with the user even while downloading is taking place. For
example, the record
.sp
S0file.dl
.sp
will tell the monitor that file.dl is about to be shipped. Some monitors will
print the message "file.dl:" on the terminal to let you know that a new file
is coming. If dl(1) can't find one of the files you asked for, it might print
.sp
S0dl: Can't find file zorko.dl
.sp
so the monitor can pass the error message on to you.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dl(1)
.br
down68(1)
.br
kern68(1)
.SH "BUGS"
Some monitors are different than others.
All, however, will successfully
download .dl files.
.SH "HISTORY"
.TP
16-Jul-82  John Schlag (jfs) at Carnegie-Mellon University
Created.
